Prometheus Tutorial for Tools (#70)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/tools/prometheus/prometheus.rst

.. _tutorials_tools_prometheus:

ROS 2 network statistics inspection with Prometheus
===================================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

Vulcanexus integrates `ROS 2 Monitor <https://fast-dds-monitor.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_, which is a useful tool for monitoring and studying a ROS 2 network as ROS 2 relies on the `DDS specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS/1.4/About-DDS/>`_ to communicate the different nodes.

> In a previous :ref:`tutorial <tutorials_tools_fastdds_monitor>`, a demonstration on how to use this powerful tool in a ROS 2 talker/listener scenario was shown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`This other tutorial <tutorials_tools_fastdds_monitor>` demonstrates how to use this powerful tool in a ROS 2 ``demo_nodes_cpp`` ``talker``/``listener`` scenario.
```

> However, Vulcanexus Tools offers more possibilities when it comes to statistics visualization; *ROS 2 Monitor* is a frontend application relying on *Fast DDS Statistics Backend*, but the latter may also be leveraged with alternative visualization utilities such as `Prometheus <https://prometheus.io>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, Vulcanexus Tools offers more possibilities when it comes to statistics visualization; *ROS 2 Monitor* is a frontend application relying on *Fast DDS Statistics Backend*, but the latter may also be leveraged with alternative visualization utilities such as `Prometheus <https://prometheus.io>`_ and `Grafana <https://grafana.com>`_.
```

> This tutorial provides step-by-step instructions on how to monitor a ROS 2 talker/listener in Vulcanexus by using *Fast DDS Statistics Backend* along with *Prometheus*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial provides step-by-step instructions on how to monitor a ROS 2 talker/listener in Vulcanexus by using *Fast DDS Statistics Backend* along with *Prometheus*.
```

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/prometheus_overview.png
    :align: center

Prerequisites
-------------

Vulcanexus Tools
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Ensure that the Vulcanexus installation includes Vulcanexus Tools (either ``vulcanexus-humble-desktop``, ``vulcanexus-humble-tools``, or ``vulcanexus-humble-base``).
Also, remember to source the environment in every terminal in this tutorial.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash

Prometheus exporter
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Additionally, `C++ Prometheus exporter <https://github.com/eProsima/prometheus-cpp/>`_ is required to forward the statistical data received by the backend to *Prometheus*.
Install `this <https://github.com/eProsima/prometheus-cpp/>`_ specific version of *Prometheus exporter* by following any of the methods described in the given link.

Prometheus
^^^^^^^^^^

It is recommended (although **not required**) to install *Prometheus* for being able to visualize gathered statistics.

> If not installed, data will still be exported and visible in the terminal, but no graphs will be displayed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If not installed, data will still be collected and visible in the terminal, but no graphs will be displayed.
```

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir ~/Fast-DDS-statistics-backend && cd ~/Fast-DDS-statistics-backend
    git clone https://github.com/eProsima/Fast-DDS-statistics-backend.git
    cd ~/Fast-DDS-statistics-backend/examples/cpp/ROS2Prometheus
    mkdir build && cd build
    cmake .. && make

Execute ROS 2 demo nodes with statistics
----------------------------------------

In order to activate the publication of statistical data, `eProsima Fast DDS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/>`_ requires an environment variable specifying which kinds of statistical data are to be reported.
Consequently, before launching the ROS 2 nodes, remember to set ``FASTDDS_STATISTICS`` environment variable.
Run the following commands in different terminals (remember to source the Vulcanexus environment):

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTDDS_STATISTICS="HISTORY_LATENCY_TOPIC;PUBLICATION_THROUGHPUT_TOPIC;PHYSICAL_DATA_TOPIC"

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker

Launch backend application
--------------------------

> Once communication between the talker and listener has been established, we may now launch our application for gathering and exporting statistical data to *Prometheus*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once communication between the talker and listener has been established, launch the application for gathering and exporting statistical data to *Prometheus*.
```

.. code-block:: bash

>     cd ~/Fast-DDS-statistics-backend/examples/cpp/ROS2Prometheus/build

Reviewer: Why `build` rather than `install`?

    ./ROS2Prometheus

Traces showing the latency and publication throughput should be visible on screen, with an update period of 5 seconds.

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/prometheus_backend.png
    :align: center

Visualizing with Prometheus
---------------------------

Launch *Prometheus* with the given `configuration file <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/Fast-DDS-statistics-backend/main/examples/cpp/ROS2Prometheus/prometheus.yml>`_ and create a graph for each of the metrics exported (``fastdds_latency`` and ``publication_throughput``).

.. code-block:: bash

    cd prometheus-install-path
    ./prometheus --config.file=prometheus.yml
    xdg-open http://localhost:9090

.. figure:: /rst/figures/tutorials/tools/monitor_screenshots/prometheus_plot.png
    :align: center

.. note::

    If running Vulcanexus in Docker containers, and if *Prometheus* has been installed in the host's system, it is required to pass ``--net=host`` argument to the backend application container in order to enable communication between them.

> *Prometheus* is a versatile open source monitoring system offering seamless interoperability with other analytics and visualization applications such as `Graphana <https://grafana.com/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Prometheus* is a versatile open source monitoring system offering seamless interoperability with other analytics and visualization applications such as `Grafana <https://grafana.com/>`_.
```
